# CSD 331: Database Modeling and Design

Syllabus – **Fall 2025** 

Lake Washington Institute of Technology

## Course Information

- Credits: 5
- Total Hours: 60
  - Theory (Lecture) Hours: 40
  - Guided Practice (Lab) Hours: 20
- Class times: **Mo 6:00PM - 8:50PM** (Sep. 29 - Dec. 13)
- Class location: **Technology Center Room T221**
- Last Day to Withdraw from Classes: Wednesday, November 26
- No class sessions on the following non-academic days:
  - Monday, October 13 (Instruction Inservice Day)
  - Wednesday, November 5 (Advising Day)
  - Tuesday, November 11 (Holiday)
  - Thursday-Saturday, November 27-29 (Holiday)

## Contact Information

- **Dr. Vishesh Khemani** 
  - Pronunciation: vish-AYSH kay-MAA-nee
  - Pronouns: he/him/his
- You can reach out to me using any of the following:
  - vishesh.khemani@lwtech.edu
  - Canvas Inbox (http://LWTech.Instructure.com) 
- My work hours are typically 9a to 5p M-F and I usually respond to emails within 1 working day
  - If you don't hear back from me within a day, something's wrong, so please ping me again or see me in class
- You can meet with me either by attending my office hours (in-person) or by emailing me some times that work for you for a Teams meeting
  - **Office hours: Mo and We 4p - 5p in W403**  

## Course Description 

From the [catalog](https://catalog.lwtech.edu):

"The course introduces relational database schema design using real-life data examples. Advanced data management topics are examined, including data modeling, normalization, analysis of query efficiency, and usage of stored procedures and triggers. Non-relational (NoSQL) databases used with Big Data are introduced and compared with RDBMS."

## Prerequisites

"CSD 138, MATH 220, and admission to the BAS IT:CSD program"

## Course Outcomes

From the [catalog](catalog.lwtech.edu):

"Upon successful completion of this course students will be able to:

- Query and update relational databases
- Gather requirements for designing a real-life database
- Properly design RDBMS schema
- Use entity-relationship modeling tools
- Evaluate performance issues and create database indices
- Create database views
- Describe principles of pessimistic and optimistic concurrency control methodologies
- Identify and implement database integrity constraints
- Explain usage cases for stored procedures and triggers
- Normalize a database schema
- Explain the advantages of three normal forms
- Explain issues related to database security and ways to secure a database
- Explain design and implementation issues specific to distributed databases
- Demonstrate knowledge of non-relational database models and compare them to relational models"

## Program Outcomes

"This course teaches to the following program outcomes:

- demonstrate competency in software engineering, software testing principles, and quality assurance techniques
- identify, evaluate, and apply efficient algorithms and technologies required for developing software system
- demonstrate ability to understand and integrate contributions to the architecture design of a large software system
- be prepared to obtain an entry-level position at a software development company"

## College-Wide Learning Outcomes

"This course teaches to the college-wide learning outcome of Communication, the ability to engage effectively in verbal, non-verbal, written, and/or symbolic expression."

## Method of Instruction 

- Theory (Lecture): Students are engaged with faculty and class members in learning theoretical material and/or engaging in activities to apply the theory leading to mastery of course outcomes. Modes of instructional delivery could include but are not limited to: lecture, small group discussion, guided conversation, demonstration, case studies, role playing, problem-based inquiry, and collaborative activities. Instruction may be a mix of presentation, facilitation, and guided activities evidenced by frequent ongoing communication between instructor and students. One credit is generated by one weekly contact hour of instruction or the equivalent amount of work over a different amount of time. Generally, requires out-of-class student effort, typically two hours per class hour.
- Guided Practice (Lab): Students are actively engaged in practicing and mastering skills under the supervision of the instructor. This category of instruction could include but is not limited to labs, studios, shops, clinical experiences, computer-mediated learning, hands-on projects, or other skill building activities. Instruction may be individualized or group-focused and include skills assessment. One credit is generated by two weekly contact hours of instruction or the equivalent amount of work over a different amount of time. May also include out-of-class student effort, typically one hour per two class hours.

## Course Delivery

- Hybrid course: Class sessions occur face-to-face and online. **Students are expected to attend face-to-face sessions** and complete online activities, in addition to homework assignments. Online activities and homework are completed in Canvas.

## Technology Requirements, Textbook(s), and Required Tools, Supplies, and/or Materials

### Technology Requirements

To successfully participate in this course, students need the following minimum technology:

- Access to a computer (personal or lab), both in class and outside of class, with:
  - **Web-browser** (e.g. Safari, Chrome, ...)
  - **Terminal**/command-line
  - **Text editor** (e.g. VSCode, Atom, ...)
  - **Git**
  - **MySQL**

Contact me if you have questions or cannot currently meet the technology requirements for the course. You can check out a laptop from the Library at LWTech (their hours and contact information are available at LWTech.edu/Library). If the Library does not have any devices available, you may be able to access an Emergency Grant to purchase your own laptop or internet service. The Emergency Grant application can be completed at LWTech.edu/EmergencyGrant (scroll down to the Emergency Grant section).

### Textbook (recommended) 

There are **no required textbooks** for this class. However, if you want to go deeper into some topics, I recommend the following books:

| Title                                            | Authors                | Edition | ISBN-10    | ISBN-13         | Publisher         | Year |
|:-------------------------------------------------|:----------------------|:-------|:-----------|:----------------|:------------------|:-----|
| Database Systems: Design, Implementation & Management | Carlos Coronel, Steven Morris | 14th   | 0357673034 | 978-0357673034   | Cengage Learning  | 2023 |

Textbook(s) available for purchase in the LWTech bookstore or online at www.lwtechshop.com. The bookstore will be open for walk-in customers and online ordering.  If ordering on the website, students can choose to pick up their order in store, or they can have their order shipped to them for an additional fee. bookstore (LWTech.edu/Bookstore). 

## Grading 

Per LWTech’s grading policy, a minimum grade of 2.0 is required to apply the course towards both satisfying a prerequisite and meeting college graduation requirements. However, a grade between 0.7 and 1.9, while not passing, demonstrates that you earned credit for the course to meet certain financial aid or high school requirements. Any grade below 0.7 is entered as 0.0 in Washington State’s community and technical college grading system.

### Grading Scale

The tentative scale to convert your overall course percentage ($p$) into a GPA is the following:

- $\text{GPA}(0 \le p \lt 60) = 0.0$
- $\text{GPA}(60 \le p \lt 93) = 0.7 + (p - 60)/10$
- $\text{GPA}(93 \le p) = 4.0$

| GPA  | Percentage |
| :--- | :--------- |
| 4.0  | $\ge 93$   |
| 3.0  | 83         |
| 2.0  | 73         |
| 1.0  | 63         |
| 0.7  | 60         |
| 0.0  | $\lt 60$   |

The above scale is **subject to change** when I determine the final grades. So please don't game your grade (e.g. by choosing to skip an assignment and still earn your target GPA) because the cut offs may change. Your best strategy is to do your best.

### Weighting of Course Components

| Weight | Group                    |
| ------ | ------------------------ |
| 60%    | Assignments (weekly)     |
| 30%    | Quizzes (every class)    |
| 10%    | Engagement (every class) |

## Course Policies and Procedures


- Check Canvas and your student email daily
- Live sessions in this class will be recorded and available on Canvas
- Please inform me in advance if you're unable to make it to a class session. If you have a valid reason I'll excuse you from the quiz for that day or offer a make up option during office hours.
- Please inform me in advance if you won't be able to submit your assignment by the deadline. If you have a valid reason I'll excuse you from that assignment. There is no option to obtain an extension.
- Absences and Accommodations for Faith and Conscience

  - Students who will be absent from course activities due to reasons of faith or conscience may seek reasonable accommodations so that grades are not impacted. Such requests must be made within the first two weeks of the quarter and should follow the procedures listed online (LWTech.edu/StudentServicesPolicies in 5.P.08).
- Absences and Accommodations for Military Reservists

  - Students who will be absent due to Reservists and National Guard monthly drills and/or VA appointments may seek reasonable accommodations so that grades are not impacted. Such requests should be made at the earliest possible time in the quarter and should follow the procedures listed in the Student Handbook.
- Academic Integrity
  - Students should review the Academic Dishonesty Program Dismissal/Appeal and Final Grade Appeal policy. Academic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, and fabrication. 
    - Cheating includes any attempt to give or obtain unauthorized assistance relating to the completion of an academic assignment.
    - Plagiarism includes taking and using as one’s own, without proper attribution, the ideas, writings, or work of another person in completing an academic assignment. This includes Artificial Intelligence (AI) generated text and other AI output. Prohibited conduct may also include the unauthorized submission for credit of academic work that has been submitted for credit in another course. 
      - Using AI generated text or other AI output may be considered plagiarism. Each instructor and each assignment may have varying expectations of use. 
    - Fabrication includes falsifying data, information, or citations in completing an academic assignment and also includes providing false or deceptive information to an instructor concerning the completion of an assignment.
  - Engaging in academic dishonesty, including plagiarism, may lead to zero credit on the assignment or assessment in question. Engaging in academic dishonesty a second time may result in no credit in the course. All instances of academic dishonesty shall be reported to the college's confidential database, which may result in additional investigation and corrective action through the student conduct process.
- Computer and Cell Phone Usage
  - Please use devices only for class activities during class
  - LWTech computer users are limited to applications listed on screen menus. They are not allowed to install programs or alter system configurations, defaults, system settings, system files, program files, data files, desktop configuration.
- Community Standards

  - It is expected that we will respect the rights and dignity of students, faculty, and all others on campus and online at all times. This includes doing our part to create a safe, distraction-free, and collaborative learning environment. Homophobic, racist, sexist, and other demeaning language and/or actions are not permitted. If you would like to report a bias incident use the bias incident reporting form. (https://www.LWTech.edu/About/Campus-Safety/Incident-Reporting/Bias-Response-Team/)

## Student Conduct Expectations

All students must conduct themselves as responsible college community members by following the Student Code of Conduct (www.LWTech.edu/StudentConduct). The Student Code of Conduct applies to conduct on-campus (at all times), while participating in off-site college sponsored activities (including field trips and online classes), and off-campus (when the actions/behavior impact the college community). While students are participating in face to face or online classes, prohibited behavior includes but is not limited to: use of drugs, alcohol, or tobacco products, and/or being observably under the influence of drugs or alcohol while participating in classes. All potential student conduct violations will be referred to the student conduct officer.

## Disability Support Services

If you have a physical, psychological, medical, or learning disability that may impact your course work, you may request accommodations and apply for services through DSS Online (https://Cascade.AccessibleLearning.com/LWTech/ApplicationStudent.aspx).
After you provide documentation of a disability, the office will coordinate directly with your faculty to ensure you are given reasonable accommodations to support your success. All information and documentation is confidential. You can reach DSS by phone at 425-739-8300 or by email (dssInfo@LWTech.edu). For additional information please refer to LWTech.edu/dss.

## Non-Discrimination

Lake Washington Institute of Technology is committed to equality of educational opportunity. LWTech does not discriminate in offering access to its educational programs and activities on the basis of race, creed, color, national origin, citizenship or immigration status, sexual orientation, gender identity, sex, honorably discharged veteran or military status, status as a mother breastfeeding her child, the presence of any sensory, mental, or physical disability, or the use of a trained dog guide or service animal by a person with a disability (RCW 49.60.215). 

## Title IX

LWTech provides a safe learning environment for all students that is free of all forms of discrimination and sexual harassment, including sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking.  If you (or someone you know) has experienced or experiences any of these incidents, know that you are not alone.
As an institution of higher learning that receives federal funds, LWTech is required to abide by Title IX, which states: "No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.” For more information on Title IX, including contact information, go to the college’s Policies and Procedures, Title IX webpage (https://www.LWTech.edu/About/Policies-and-Procedures/title-ix-and-Sexual-Misconduct/). In many cases, such discrimination violates state and federal law. The Executive Director of HR, Meena Park (Meena.Park@lwtech.edu) handles inquiries regarding LWTech’s non-discrimination policies.

## Student Support Resources

Visit www.LWTech.edu/StudentSupportResources for more information on each of the following:

- Bookstore
- Campus Public Safety (Inclement Weather Closures)
- Canvas Support - eLearning 
- Career Services
- Community Resources
- Counseling Services and Mental Health Care
- DEN Food Pantry
- Disability Support Services
- Financial Assistance: Financial Aid and Workforce Development
- Food and Shelter
- Information Technology Services
- Justice Involved Students: Re-Entry Support
- Library
- Meditation Room
- Paying for College
- RISE Center
- Student Handbook
- Student Representation and Advocacy
- TRiO
- Tutoring
- Veteran Services

